---
title: Programming is hard
tags: Programming
---

Software is weird. In its basic form, software is this very abstract thing with
seemingly little connection to the real world. Yet graphical applications
running on a hardware device like a modern phone /feel/ very real, even to
people who have no appreciation of what happens within this "black box". Some
pieces of software is even able to control hardware to perform real actions in
the physical world.

As programmers, some of the code that we write is supposed to model real world
concepts, and as a result the code often reflects this in its structure and
form. Other pieces of code are purely abstract and solve "metaphysical" problems
that only exist within the realm of computers. Code solving abstract problems
might also serve as necessary foundations to build more tangible "real world
modelling" on top of.

At the end of the day code has no obligation or enforced requirement to resemble
the problem it's supposed to solve – and sometimes there /isn't/ even a "real"
problem to compare it to in the first place. Of course, code which is able to
somehow communicate this correlation tends to be considered more "readable" and
"maintainable" simply due to familiarity. But the purpose of the systems we
build is first and foremost "to model", not simply "to be"[fn:1].

#+begin_quote
Software is a means to an end and as long as the behavior of our model solves
our problem well enough users tend to be satisfied.

- Me @RightNow
#+end_quote

Performance considerations aside, computers do not care at all about the
/structure/ of the programs they're evaluating. A legacy spaghetti mess of a
codebase might solve a problem just as well as any well-crafted system. The cost
of poorly constructed solutions only becomes relevant when we factor in the fact
that humans tend to have to come back and make changes to them.

This highlights one of the more hidden, but considerable challenges of being a
programmer: Having to translate real world requirements into abstract constructs
that – when evaluated by a computer – model our problem domain to a satisfactory
degree. And we have to do this while also considering how we best can model our
abstractions so both our future selves and our peers are able to make sense of
them.

Much of the online discourse about the complexity of programming tend to focus
on complexity associated with programming languages, tools and technology stacks
that we use. Not so much on how we can more effectively understand requirements
and translate these into code. Neither how we can ensure that these requirements
can be communicated and maintained over time as our system evolves. This is not
to say there /are/ no such efforts. I myself very much enjoyed attending the
[[https://2023.dddeurope.com/][2023 edition of DDD Europe]] where this exact problem is front-and-center.

Learning a programming language syntax and semantics can be both time-consuming
and mind-bending[fn:2]. The same goes for tools, services and infrastructure
that's central to building modern applications and services. And not only that!
Many of these technologies /change/ at a rapid pace, so even keeping up with
updates to things we already though we knew can feel overwhelming. But let's not
also forget or neglect our responsibility to understand the people and the world
around us – and how crucial this understanding is to ensure quality and purpose
in the majority of the code that we write.

Yeah, programming is hard! I mean, like, really hard!

[fn:1] This does not mean that there can't be code for the sake of code – be
that recreation, art or other purposes. But the code that most of us are /paid/
to write quickly falls into this category.

[fn:2] This doesn't just hold true when learning your /first/ programming
language. Crossing programming language paradigms can also be quite a big
challenge. Attempting to learn ~Haskell~ after many years of using more
conventional languages was not just mind-opening to me, it was also bloody
difficult to /unlearn/ some of the things I already /knew/.
